the Hamas militant group together with
Islamic Jihad has handed another 10
Israeli hostages and two foreign
Nationals over to the International Red
Cross as part of a truce deal with
Israel the Israeli military says the
hostages are now back on Israeli
territory in exchange Israel has
released 30 Palestinian prisoners who
have arrived in the West Bank this comes
on the fifth day of a truce between
Israel and Hamas the group is considered
by many countries to be a terrorist
[Music]
organization Ben fulin is in Jerusalem
and has more Ben what's the latest on
the release of hostages and
prisoners hi Nicole the latest we've
also received is that hamus and Islamic
Jihad has handed over uh this latest
group of hostages to the international
Committee of the Red Cross the neutral
Swiss based group uh two Thai Nationals
who were uh workers here foreign workers
here in Israel and then 10 Israeli women
among them uh a German Jewel National
according to the German foreign minister
analina babok and a teenager as well Mia
libag um hamus released uh a video just
a short time ago of Mia being released
and escorted by m militants along with
her dog who'd also been captive uh taken
captive on October 7 uh We've also
receiv received information that the 30
Palestinian prisoners have now been
transferred uh from both prison in the
West Bank and here in Jerusalem 15 women
and 15 minors um a lot of these
prisoners who've been released over the
past days have been uh jailed for
attempted murder stabbings throwing of
petrol bombs uh throwing of stones at
Israeli soldiers and Hamas has been
celebrating this as a major victory uh
dozens of prisoners having been released
but you have to remember that Israel has
arrested an extra 3,000 Oro Palestinians
just in the past weeks in the West Bank
Ben is there any fresh information on
this truce possibly being extended even
further we're still being told that it's
very unclear this uh Tuesday was the
first day of the extended truce it was a
wobbly day uh there were violations
reported by both sides but only minor
and uh minor injuries involved in those
altercations according to K these were
minimal breaches noted by both but they
did not uh breach or harm the essence of
the deal hmer says it's still committed
uh we've heard tonight though that the
security minister the far right security
minister of Benjamin netanyahu's cabinet
has been urging him to end the truce
because of these violations he wants
Israel to get back to war but there is
so much pressure from abroad on benan
Netanyahu to stick to this truce and
extend it there have been meetings today
in Doha uh the capital of Qatar among uh
the Egyptian officials involved the
mediators Qatar and also the US and
Israeli spy Chiefs they're trying to get
men included in these hostage releases
the big question being though whether or
not Hamas wants to hold on to these
hostages the rest of these hostages as a
bargaining chip uh Israel is not going
to get them out if it doesn't extend the
ceasefire but Israel also uh says that
the only reason Hamas is releasing these
hostages is because of so much military
pressure that's it's applied both from
the sea the air and the ground DW's Ben
fulan reporting from Jerusalem great
speaking to
you and for more I am joined Now by Yan
eligant the Secretary General of the
Norwegian Refugee Council and a former
peace negotiator who helped draw up the
Oslo agreements between Israel and
Palestinians in 1993 welcome to W Mr
eigel and thanks so much for your time
today we're seeing a deal right now
between Israel and Hamas it seems to be
working so far there's a possibility of
more extensions what do you think this
could lead to well it could lead to a
longer pause with more freed hostages
more freed prisoners and to more of Gaza
getting the aid it desperately needs but
it could also end I mean in in a day or
two and that would be catastrophic so we
are urging for a prolonged ceasefire we
do not think that continued Warfare
would make Israel safer and it will
certainly made uh make uh Gaza unlivable
for 2.3 million people the best majority
of them completely innocent with what H
the horrors of the 7th of
October at the moment we have a
situation where Qatar is acting as a as
a mediator between the two sides they
won't speak to each other directly is
this the right way to proceed in your
opinion at this stage definitely yes Kat
also with help of Egypt and others are
bro and the United States are brokering
these deals and it just shows then that
yes the two sides can make agreements
it's they have done so also in the in
the past uh Israel have always regarded
Hamas as a terrorist organization they
have still broken deals uh what we hope
is that the deals with expand to really
do something about the siege of Gaza
remember gas is a very small place I
mean it's it's half of the M
Municipality of Osa where I live 2.3
million people live there There Is No
Escape they cannot go it's not like they
have Poland like the ukrainians or or
any other place to go so The Siege has
to be lifted and there has to be an end
to the bombardment and there has to be a
release of all of the remaining hostes
of course can I ask you what role you
potentially see Europe play playing in
the situation in any potential
negotiations well Europe would be an
important uh player in reconstruction in
in humanitarian agreements Etc I do not
necessarily see Europe in
mediating an end to the occupation and
the final status issues that were left
unresolved with the Oslo agreement where
we got Mutual recognition and we get a
start of a Palestinian uh Administration
and a few other things H it has to be
the United States they are the only ones
who can really influence Israel with
Qatar Egypt Gulf countries that can in
influence the very split Palestinian
site you've made the urgency of the
situation very clear um we've we've
heard very strong rhetoric though
haven't we from both sides um over the
past week
given this very complicated situation
heated atmosphere I mean is it even
possible that this could lead to more
formal
negotiations given the sensitivity of
this I I think it has to lead to I I
think the rest of the world will also
demand that it has to lead to a more
final settlement of this very long
Israeli Palestinian conflict I don't
think Hamas as an organization will be
part of this Palestinians will have to
be part of this I don't think the
Israeli government with the that is the
most extreme government in the history
of Israel really with the with the
people there who are who are organizing
settler violence and
whatnot it has to be the International
Community that has to push push this
really the United States Qatar Egypt
Gulf countries they have to push this
you've mentioned the Israeli government
led by uh Benyamin Netanyahu uh the
Prime Minister he has said that he is
committed to Res resuming the war to
ending Hamas Rule and crushing its
military
capabilities um what's your take on that
very clear
strategy in that it's not very clear the
strategy is not very clear what what
does that mean it it means to kill
Palestinians until the last fighter is
killed uh the L member of Hamas there is
a lot of it's it's it's it's a it's a
movement doing so social work etc as
well as having the military Wing the
Kasam Brigade that they want to take
those killers from the 7th of October I
very much understand but they have
killed thousands of children now with
their own bombardment the rest of the
world doesn't really accept that war on
terror would mean killing thousands of
innocent children
I wanted to ask I mean is there any way
that the people in Gaza can be prot
protect protected if the truce ends and
fighting intensifies across all parts of
the territory no I fear it will be even
worse uh because more people are crammed
together in a smaller area in the South
if they're now coming after cunis which
is the the central refugee camps where
many of my colleagues my organization
which refug Council has 53 colleagues
inside they are Palestinians they've
also fled for their lives they were told
to go to the South now they've told
leave the South because we're coming
coming to bombard you there as well that
it's meaningless to continue the war as
it has been so we hope the United States
and the United Kingdom and Germany that
are naturally friends and and allies of
Israel can convince them
to Shield the civilian population which
means an end to this uh bombardment
which is indiscriminate Mr egland you
say that you are an
optimist are you still hopeful even in
in these days of
Crisis I'm generally an optimist that we
will come out of all of the enormous
crisis we have short term I am actually
pretty
pessimistic U remember also what you're
covering here now is is is actually
something deeply problematic one is
selling people for for for Commodities
here he has 10 hostages he has 150
prisoners he has some trucks we trade
here all of this should be should not be
traded about hostages should be released
all of them those who are arbitrarily
detained by Israel teenagers for stone
throwing that sit forever in jail
without Law And Justice should be
released our Aid trucks should not be
negotiated access we should have a right
and obligation to provide uh
humanitarian relief across gasa we need
to resume to some
sensible Humane methods here and not
continue with this Yan egeland Secretary
General of the Norwegian Refugee Council
thank you so much for your time today we
appreciate
it I now speak to Oliver murnan in
London he's a former hostage negotiator
and the director of Forward Thinking and
organization addressing issues related
to the Middle East peace process welcome
to DW now the current deal between
Israel and Hamas which is of course
classified by multiple countries as a
terrorist organization seems to be
working so far do you think this could
pave the way for further
negotiations well I hope so um I think
anyone who is concerned about the
humanitarian
situation both for the hostages and
their families and for the 2.3 million
people in Gaza we would wish to see this
temporary ceasefire become permanent
because I think the only way to secure
the safe release of the rest of the
hostages is to have a a permanent not
just a temporary ceasefire but a
permanent ceasefire because from the
beginning I felt the is
OB
the first of all to elimin and then to
release hostages I think they were
incompatible and hopefully now this
momentum of having a truce will evolve
into a permanent ceasefire and then a
political
negotiation um you're breaking up there
I don't think your internet connection
is holding
up uh let's talk with our technical
staff to see if we can keep it going it
looks like you're back up now what do
you make of the process so far with the
US and Qatar acting as mediators because
the two sides won't speak to each other
directly how much of a hindrance is
that yeah well I think I have the
greatest admiration for the qari um
negotiators because I can't imagine the
difficulties there have at least five
different um
points of reference that they have to go
through in order to reach agreement when
I was involved with the chalit agreement
it was a very simple thing of having a
designated group of negotiators on the
Israeli side on the Hamas side and you
went between them the other thing I
think that complicates the negotiation
process is this constant um press
conferences um in the five years that I
did the Shalit deal no one knew what was
going on or no one knew who was involved
and I think that makes it much easier um
but as I say I have the highest praise
for the qari negotiators being able to
deal with such a complex
process you have been in touch with
Hamas officials since October 7th what
did they tell you about their goals in
all of
this well by chance I was in Doha two
days after October 7th and I think it
was recognized that what happened to
civilians indiscriminate killing and the
hostage taking a civilians wasn't right
and the message I was given then was
clearly that all the civilian hostages
could be released without negot without
negotiation or without any preconditions
provided that there was um a ceasefire
that would enable the coordination and
the whole process to take place I
communicated that message but obviously
and understandably And I stress that I
think Israel was very much in a
traumatized situation and I think it
still is and therefore needs good
friends to be able to guide it in a time
like this but the message wasn't heard
and now what's happening I think could
have happened um much
earlier now Israel says they will not
stop until they have crushed Hamas they
also say they want all their hostages
back for now both sides have only
released women and children from your
experience and and from what we're
seeing from the Israeli side this
reluctance towards a a durable ceasefire
do you see any way men and and soldiers
could be freed as part of a deal as
well well if I may explain and in
explaining I don't in any way endorse it
and I'd like to stress that but the
reason
why um soldiers were taken was that they
were seen as a leverage to ensure the
release of Palestinian prisoners who
otherwise would die in Israeli jail so
the soldier I think is seeing in a
different category from the civilian
hostages I think the negotiations over
the soldiers will be much more difficult
and um I just sincerely hope for they
too have families they too have loved
ones that want them see
reunited just as much as the thousands
of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jail
are wanted back by their families I
sincerely hope that we will understand
now there is no military solution to
this process I think the the the reality
the horror of what has happened the
infliction of real hurt on both sides
this is a moment when I think that we
should see that it's only a political
process that will find a durable
solution I come from Ireland the Irish
had to learn that very hard way as did
the British that you couldn't have a
military solution to the Irish um
problem that it had to be a political
process but what is essential that
process has to be inclusive all the
significant people with constituency
need to be involved in the negotiations
in the desire of what they want to see
happen in an independent
Palestine otherwise I fear the
agreements reached as we saw with Oslo
will not stand the test of time oler MC
turn and a former hostage negotiator and
director of Forward Thinking thanks for
that